design study on it, and we had a regular naval
architect actually do the nitty-gritty, you
know, drawing the lines and laying out the
compartments. I think around here, if anybody has
enough interest in it, they can get pretty much
what they want. Again, we've got a hardcore group
of seagoing people here, probably only half a
dozen, out of a staff of about fifty that go to sea.
And considering my experience both at Woods Hole
and Scripps, I think we'd do a lot better as far as
getting the kinds of things that we feel we need on
the ship. Well, of course, when I was both of those
places, I was in a hierarchy, of course, much lower
down, right next to the bottom. and here I'm
halfway up it. So I feel that I get just about
everything I want as far as ship time goes, and I get
all the ship time I need. Again, having been at sea
many, many times, I'm a little bit conservative
about how I design my programs. I always,
depending on when you start the game and the ship
time request thing, we jockey back and forth. and
then you end up with X number of days. And then I
always design a program to fit within it with some
slop on either end, having had, you know,
experiences with weather and things like this.
And then what we always try to do is fill in the
clinks with other people. Like this coming
spring, we'll be going up north again, and there
are two primary programs that are going to be
serviced. And we can do that with probably
somewhere between nine and eleven people, but we
can carry eighteen. So what we'll do is, well,
invite other people along. They might be
students, they might be people from elsewhere,
but we always fill the ship up. I think our
programs, when they go to sea, both, well, in all
the programs that we've been involved with at both
Scripps, Woods Hole, and here, we've always had a
full complement. We've always design programs
where we can accommodate other people mainly
because we get something from them and they get
something from us but by and large we get pretty
much the ship time that we ask for now it's almost as
if it were deliberate now you know I'm as an
historian I'm you know signing this from just what
I've read so I may have misconstrued it feel free to
tell me so but it's almost as if it were deliberate
on the part of the University of Washington
Washington not to participate in international
expeditions of one sort or another. Is that
correct, and is that a good choice to make? I guess
our track record on that has been sort of spotty. At
one point, because we had one of the major programs
of IDOE here, but because of personality
problems, I think more than anything else, they
had a shootout at the O.K. Corral, and academia
being the conservative
sort of a—what word am I looking for? Anyway, it's
sort of the nobility-type structure, and if
you're not in the structure, you lose. And so the
group got fed up, and they bailed out and sort of
disintegrated. We do have people here who do
participate in international programs, but
we're not the lead organization. Again, that
probably has something to do with our backwards
outlook on life,
and how do you get hired, how do you get promoted,
how do you get pay raises? You know, you just put
your body in, and if it always consists of
multi-authored papers, then the poor guy's stuck
with the comment that he can't do any original
thinking. If he only has single-authored papers,
well, then he can't get along with anybody. So
again, with these larger multi-institutional or
at least coordinated efforts, the product is
almost invariably multi-othered papers. And for
our junior members to get involved with that is
suicide. And a lot of them have gotten involved
with it, and they're no longer here. That's just
the way it is. I think it's kind of wrong. I think the
department chairman or whoever there's going to
be a spokesman at the promotion or pay raise thing,
should take the time to figure out what the guy has
done. You know, you can't always tell on paper, but
time and time again, we go down and we half-lease
things out in our promotion thing, which I guess
because of the way we do it, it turns out to be
policy, or it can be interpreted to be that, but if
the guy isn't doesn't look on the surface as if he is
an individual scientist doing his own thing, he
doesn't stand a chance in this department for
promotion. So, you know, you have something like
that operating for ten years, and this is
approximately how long the present department
chairman has been department chairman, he can do a
very effective weeding job, and the end result we
have has been a direct result of that kind of a
policy. The junior members, the assistant
professor level people who play the big
cooperative kinds of ventures don't stand a
chance of getting promoted. And so obviously
anybody with any insight or any, or can just notice
what's happening around him, if he wants to stay
here, he better not play that game. So that's a big
sort of historical thing, and I guess historical
can span a decade. But the other thing that if you
look at the hiring and firing record at this
institution up until about the time I came here it
looked like they were making it was a definite
policy here to fire and not hire seagoing people
that's you know that's what the record shows
although they keep telling me that's not the case
but that's that sure as heck is what the record
shows just recently we it seems to me that in order
to keep the ship running know if you want to
maintain a facility like that you got to you got to
be able to demonstrate utilization i think they
they made a concerted effort to swing around the
other way so that next year calendar year 78 is the
first year in almost a decade where we actually had
conflicts of trying to schedule the ship and part
of it's due to one of these big programs probes
which is something going on in the bering sea
insisted they had to have the ship for 120 days in
such a certain window and it couldn't stand much
shifting and from a departmental point of view we
had to accommodate these people because they're
going to use that boat for the next three years so
but this county year 78 we sure as heck had a problem
and it turns out that our Bruce Frost program and
myself We had to go down to Oregon State and use
their boat, which is probably a good thing, again,
for political reasons. We should be more
cooperative with our neighbors than we have been
in the past. There's been a change in people down
there, and there's been a change in people up here,
so maybe we can do that now.
Now, if you were to list what are your major
contributions to oceanography thus far, what
would you list? What research are you the proudest
of?
Well, okay, I guess I like to think that all the
stuff I've been doing for the last decade sort of
goes into the food web dynamics. And I've taken one
side of the phytoplankton research. And the data
I've collected, that I've personally collected
over the past decade, comes up with some viewpoint
that is rather different than the accepted
viewpoint and
this has got me into all sorts of interesting
discussions sometimes shouting arguments but
this probably has been my major contribution is
that that I've taken a rather different point of
view than an awful lot of people have been taking I
sort of goes back to my my so-called training. We
didn't have really any oceanography, per se, at
Cornell, so most of my
experience, you might say, has come out of the
textbook. And at that time, almost all the
textbook examples came from the North Sea. And I
went out to California. We started working in the
blue waters out there, and nothing fit. It didn't
fit anymore. And so I've come up with some rather
strange notions in some people's mind about how
phytoplankton in the ocean really work the big
emphasis has been on physiological aspects and
how can you relate physiology to ecology and i
don't think that really holds in the ocean the
laboratory work has been going on and we've been in
the biological oceanography field we've spent an
awful lot of money on physiological
investigations of laboratory cultures, but I
think by and large they're not really applicable
to what goes on in the ocean. And there is a small
group of us that have this point of view, and well
obviously I think we're right, but I think we're
going to change our attitude on how phytoplankton
really work in the ocean in the next decade. The
other thing which again, is sort of part of this
overall food chain thing in the ocean is our work
with sediment traps. And what we're doing is
looking at the downward movement of organic
matter. In a period of about 18 months, we've
developed a sediment trap system here that's
probably as good as anybody else's. And I like to
sort of think that some of these people who've been
playing with it for a decade have finally caught up
with us. And I'm kind of proud of that. It's got me
into an area of electronics that I never thought I
was ever going to get involved with, having
sometimes my doubts whether electricity really
exists. But that's probably
the two accomplishments. One of them is kind of a
diffuse thing, which is sort of goes through a
number of papers, and I have a chapter in a book that
came out this past year where I finally stood up and
said, this is what I think, and this is the reason
why. And the phytoplankton are different than
what we've been visualizing them all along. And
the sediment trap work, which is, again, like I
said earlier, it's one of the major unknowns in
biological oceanography maybe in the overall
scheme of things it really doesn't make much
difference but it turned out to be a problem that
was nice to work on at that time there was a couple
people here who wanted to work on it and it was the
right time right place you know right group of
people and i think it really worked out quite
nicely
that was it speaking of electricity uh Now, is
there anything you'd like to add to the tape? What
would you like to tell me? Gee, I don't know. You
want some biographical background? I'm going to
get that after you say what you'd like to say. I want
biographical background.
Well, I guess one of the questions when we get the
student-faculty get-togethers is, you know, you
always have to sort of get up and repent and stuff
like that. And I guess in retrospect,
I think I made the right choice as far as the
profession goes. It's still exciting. It's still
fun. I like going to sea.
I haven't experienced any real difficulties in
funding and ship time, by and large. I guess I'm
probably about as close as being reasonably
satisfied with what I'm doing as you can find
anywhere.
you don't know how many of the decisions you made in
the past you know were really up for you to make and
how you end up how you ended up at this point um I
guess you know the old saying is if I had to do it all
over again I probably would so I have no real
regrets about it we've all well we all when I think
of we all I think of my family and and stuff we really
have no gripes so I'm happy with what I'm doing. You
can always think of some better places or some
other places you might think would be better. My
experience has been that the quantity of problems
are always the same as the quality that differs,
and so all in all, I guess I'm quite satisfied with
it. Now, in terms of biographical data, did your
family urge you to enter oceanography or not urge
you to enter oceanography? they never thought I
was gonna go to college. So it's uh, well it was kind
of, you've probably heard this many times
yourself, I was the youngest of four, and being the
youngest of four, of course you had a baby, and my
brothers are quite a bit older than I am, and when I
got out of high school I was digging clams
commercially on Long Island, Heck, I didn't want
to go to college. I was making, actually at that
time, which would have been fifty-four,
fifty-five, somewhere around there, I was
knocking out two or three thousand bucks a month.
And, you know, for a seventeen, eighteen year old
kid, that's an awful lot of money. So, but at, all
along, ever since I was, it must have been about
ten, I started working, and I've always had, you
know, some coins jingling in my pocket. I like to
think I've tried almost everything. My family was
in the confectionery business and used to make ice
cream and candy and worked in bakery shops and set
pins. I drove trucks, worked in butcher shops,
worked on farms in upstate New York. And when it was
decided, well, it wasn't I didn't decide. I had a
brother that came home from the Korean War. And I
guess I was hanging around with a pretty fast
crowd. he decided I was going to go to college, and
we had a little set, too, in the backyard, and I got a
black eye and an application to college, and I
applied to Cornell to the ag school, and they
accepted me, which was really a surprise, because
I was just in the upper half of my graduating class
in high school, and then, you know, all sorts of
crazy things happened. When I went off to college,
I found out they paid people to do this kind of
stuff, and as an undergraduate, I worked for my
major professor and ran his field program, ran to
Boats primarily, and it's been fun. So that's sort
of a crazy way you get into these things. Is there
anybody with whom you came into contact in your
academic career who helped shape your future in
particular? Well, probably the people who sort of
pushed me ahead
at both Woods Hole and Scripps. I never really sat
down and hammered out, you might say, scientific
ideas with these people, but they almost
invariably
put me into positions where I could do things that I
wanted to do, which wasn't always the general
case. And he said, well, the guy who ran the group
down at Scripps, Morris Blackburn, this
Australian, who was a funny kind of a guy, At the
time, I didn't fully appreciate him, but he was a
heck of a good manager, you know, and he did a lot of
things for us that we, the scientists in the group,
they could never have done it themselves.
When I went off to Woods Hole, I was with the Reiser
group up there, and the opportunities to do things
were just all over the place, and all you had to do
was do them. And I don't know whether know this was
done on purpose because the other younger guys in
the group I mean we all had the same opportunities
and had opportunities to design cruises to areas
that we wanted to go to we could you know raise
questions and collect data to answer them and so I
think I've just been very lucky all along the way to
be associated with people who who had good things
happen to them that's one one cruise over I guess
one of the things that sort of summarized this up is
uh we had a cruise off Africa and there was a kid on
the boat I used to get dysentery every time he went
three miles from the United States every time he
got on the boat he got seasick and I went down we were
checking on him to see if he was still alive because
we didn't carry doctors in those days and he'd been
crawling out of state room to go to the head and the
steel door slammed on his hand and he's laying
there on the floor And I woke up to him, and I shake
him, and I say, Lou, are you okay? And he looks up to
me, and he says, stick with Lorenzen, and good
things will happen. But, you know, at the time I
left Woods Hole to go down to NSF, it was, again, it
was a personality problem. It was a shootout. I was
ticked off. Everybody, the guys I was having
fights with were ticked off. And in retrospect, it
was one of the luckiest things I ever did, was go up
to the Science Foundation. leaving Scripps,
going to Woods Hole was, again, one of the luckiest
things I've ever did, you know. And,
you know, people ask you how do you describe
yourself, you know, as far as various attributes,
and one thing is that I guess I come out looking like
an extremely good biological opportunist, or an
opportunist in a biological sense, and I think
I've been able to make the best out of wherever I
happen to fall. You know, the old thing of falling
into, you know, a lot becomes smelling like the
rose. And again, I would like to think some of it's
luck and some of it has to do with sort of insight.
I'm not willing to say which is which, but I think,
you know, all along the way I've been, I've done
well, and whether it's I've had anything to do with
it or some other external force, I can't knock it.
You know, it just seems to be... They seem to come
out reasonably well. I can't complain.